All right.
One of the questions I had is, first of all, does everything fit in the new house?
It doesn't.
So what I've done is really put the best books in the apartment.
I figured there's room for about 15,000 books, roughly, in the apartment.
Really a fraction of what you had.
Which was a fraction of what I had.
The rest is still in storage, and I'm trying to decide what to do.
about it at this point.
For example, I've taken the authors who I know I want to continue to collect in depth, say Faulkner or Hemingway or Pynchon or whatever, I have just kept the really primary titles and all the secondary titles I'm going to keep and I'm going to have to keep those in storage.
But I'm not going to keep all the authors, I mean all 6,000 authors that I've been collecting.
ambitious premise.
I couldn't handle it.
I couldn't handle it, yeah.
You're not defeated in any way.
No, I'm not.
It's just purely realistic, yeah.
And I suppose if you had unlimited funds and staff to do it, you could keep up.
But otherwise, it's certainly beyond my resources and time capacity.
One of the burning questions I had, because when we were here a year and a half ago, you really weren't doing any, you were in a hiatus.
Right, right, right.
I think part of that had to do with the fact that you didn't have a place to put them.
You didn't enjoy them.
Right, right.
But now we have this wonderful place.
And I will never stop collecting.
I'm just going to be much more selective.
and more careful about it.
So what happens then?
Of the 6,000 authors which you previously had collected, how many would you say you brought to the new house with you?
Oh, I never have done.
I can probably get that number.
Oh, I don't really even know.
I don't know.
I can get that number for you.
Because, I mean, I've got a whole inventory.
I just got them.
Have you prepared a catalog?
Not a catalog.
I had the first appraisal done that I'd ever done since I started, and a book-by-book inventory in the department.
Did you do this yourself?
Well, I participated in it.
A group of students, and this guy, Richard, who works for me, really sort of organized it.
But I don't like anybody handling the books if I'm not there.
You mentioned that before.
In fact, you even...
do the glassine.
Yeah, that's therapy.
I mean, that's just fun to do.
That's kind of fun.
How did you feel finally when you were able to, I mean, I knew instantly when I saw the Vogue takeoff.
Yeah.
That's why I called.
I'm thrilled.
It's spectacular.
And people love the room.
I mean, they just are.
In fact, when I called, I said, I saw the piece in the Vogue.
He said, how do you know that's his wife?
I said, please.
I said, there's only one person in America who owns these books.
Right, exactly.
I mean, you know, you don't have to be a physician to figure out out of Owen Armour's
It's great.
I can get it almost even though it's very high ceilings.
You know, I can get things much more easily.
And how are you enjoying the collection, though?
Oh, I love it.
It's just, it's... I mean, specifically, do you actually take things out?
I don't absolutely take things out.
Absolutely, absolutely.
Play with them.
And, you know, that's the slightest excuse.
try to show people things.
I still think people are not very interested unless they are collectors.
That's why I hope at some point that you'll show me this collection at some point.
I don't know when.
Well, when it went to a correspondent of my divorce, interestingly enough.
I just had to get that in a little bit.
That's all right.
I don't mind.
I hope it's not bad that he's my... No, no, that's all right.
But what I would suggest is that we do it someday for, you know, at the end of the day for drinks and for a couple of hours.
No, not at all.
I just, I mean, the way Tammy's schedule just became impossible because I had to be here.
She's not a collector.
No.
She doesn't understand that.
She protects me.
Exactly.
There's a magic here.
And I think, I hope I didn't express my disappointment too much.
yeah yeah that's not a hurtful it was just scheduling what's been yeah i want to see this man right collection and uh i hope i'm not being too pushy on this no no but you can see this whole book by the way is is from scratch al dante i mean there's nothing nothing clip nothing paste right i flew out to omaha just to spend 15 minutes in that warehouse yeah
I went to see Bill Scheide.
You know, he bought the 36-line Bible.
Did you know that?
I didn't know that, yeah.
He was the anonymous buyer of the... Well, now he owns six Gutenberg imprints.
He's the only person, only the third person in history to have... So, anyway.
So, you brought that... The Sinclair Lewis, yeah.
Anything else at that stage?
No, there was nothing else that, you know, in my field that I really needed that I didn't have.
I would have bought something if I needed it.
Any new authors that you've since started?
No, I'm not starting any new authors for the moment.
That's exactly what I don't want to get into.
And I'm stopping spying, you know, writers who have really made it and who now have printings of 50,000 or 100,000 copies of their new novel.
It's just not, there's really no point.
What's your feeling on proofs now?
Are you down on that?
I'm down on that.
I'm still down.
I'm definitely down on that.
Because, by the way, this is how I get proofs into my book.
So you might just, can you tell me a little bit about what's led to your disillusionment on proofs?
Well, I think it's the whole issue of being more rational and realistic about collecting.
Proofs certainly have some value.
They have some scarcity.
But in practical terms, economic and space-wise, you know, unless you are Widener Library or the New York Public Library, I mean, there's no way you can... But do they actually constitute a variant of the text?
That's why it would be... You know, sometimes it does.
Sometimes it's quite significant.
Witches of Eastwick, for instance.
He made so many changes that they actually had to bring out a second set of proof.
Right, right, exactly.
So those are worth having.
Those are worth having, absolutely.
And how about those phony little sign-limited things?
Unless it's a... Like with Applejack, you had to have 9,000... Right.
I'm still collecting those for Updike and a few people, but, yeah.
Because Updike, you're committed.
Committed, exactly.
You understand.
I mean, there comes a point where I don't care for him so much anymore as a writer, let's say.
Yeah.
I think he's a very important writer.
I do, too.
I may name his in some other greats, but he's very important.
I'm just saying, let's say.
Right.
All right, you had said before...
You serve on the board with the Morgan, and you're very deeply involved with the New York Public, and you named one other institution.
Well, I'm on the visiting committee at Harvard for the library, yeah.
And you had said that maybe there's something I could do for them with some of these books.
Right.
Still very much.
there's still something that you're thinking about.
Absolutely.
Yeah, absolutely.
In terms of a specific kind of a collection.
Well, that's what I have to work out.
That's what I have to work out.
You know, I did give my science fiction collection to the NYPL, which was, you know, as time goes on, it's quite a valuable, looks like quite a valuable gift.
If there are ways in which I can supplement or strengthen these institutions,
collections.
That's what I wouldn't want to do.
Morgan has not technically collected in the 20th century, but they are considering doing that.
They have to raise more money.
That opens up whole new... Exactly.
But I would think very, very selectively if they did.
And I think it would be primary theft.
I don't think it would be printed books so much as it might be the Tennessee Williams collection.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Which is not something I want to give away right now.
Anyway.
I think it's very important.
You know, I asked Louise, who's in her 40s, or how old she is, and had to say, what are you going to do with this?
And she blinged her eyes like, well, I'm enjoying it.
Pardon my delicacy, but I mean in the long run.
She said, gee, you know, I hadn't...
I get 25 years of serious collection and we'll think about it.
That's what I think, and I can answer it even better.
It depends on what percentage or how large a piece of my estate it represents.
My first object is to leave as much money to my children and wife as possible.
If I'm very successful in other kinds of investments and the books become a relatively small piece of my estate, then why not?
It makes sense to give them to an institution.
If they are a significant dollar asset, then I would want them sold so the kids could get the money.
That's what Haskell Norman's going to do.
Very simple, and until I die, I don't know the answer to that question.
Okay, and I think that's the perfect answer, by the way.
Shidey, for instance, is the third generation.
His library, if any library is worth a hundred million dollars, it's his.
He has everything.
Literally everything that you can imagine.
His daughter is a rare book librarian.
She's married to a guy who's an assistant librarian.
So they're book people.
This is off the record.
He won't tell you that it's going to Princeton, but off the record it is, because they can't afford
Absolutely.
They'd have to come up with $65 million in cash.
Let's say it's a $100 million collection.
They'd have to come up with $60 million roughly in cash.
That's unspeakable, isn't it?
It's ridiculous.
How can you possibly keep something?
You can't.
The best you can do is let them keep a few things they really want.
But unless you're just vastly rich, there's no way you can do it.
What this means, you see, is that the last Gutenberg Bible of private hands will become part of the Princeton University, which is okay, but it's nice to be, he's a chapter by himself.
He's a 19th century collector in the 1990s.
He goes and he takes his Gutenberg Bible out, his 36-line Bible, his Blickling homily, which is the only Anglo-Saxon manuscript in America.
You've got a fourth-century codex.
It's better than the Morgan had.
You got it through Mr. Krauss.
It's the complete gospel according to Matthew.
There's stuff in it that's not even in the... No, within 200 years of its composition.
Yeah.
Unbelievable.
That's unbelievable.
I think the more likely thing is that you're going to see more auctioning of material.
Yeah.
Because they've taken away the tax incentives for giving these things, too.
Now, if you...
If you paid $50,000 for your Gutenberg Bible, and it's now worth $2 million... They paid $45,000, and it's the only one, so it's probably worth $15 million, according to Stephen Mason.
Really?
It's in its original binding, and it's the last one that'll ever be sold.
It could be worth $20 million.
Yeah.
You'd have to pay tax on his gain before taking a deduction.
But his father bought it.
Well, it's kind of... His father bought it from Rosenbach in 1920.
I'm just telling you, there is no... It used to be...
You could give that book to De Morgan and take a $15 million deduction.
They won't let you do that.
Can't do that.
So they get you both ways.
They get you both ways.
So they screw you in terms of... It really is terrible.
It's a change in 86 that they made, I think 85, 86.
Stephen Massey says that a Gutenberg Bible now...
The complete one, because there are none left.
It would be the last one sold, although it's not unprecedented that an institution might want to raise money.
The accession, yeah.
Because the one that went over to Slipkart was sold by the General Theological Seminary here in New York.
Right, right, right.
So you never know.
Listen, if you've got to hustle... I do, yeah.
Let's do five more minutes.
You know, I saw the pictures.
I mean, does it replicate anything?
No, those are just close-ups.
I'd rather not.
Yeah.
I think it would disappoint me.
I'm sure it's spectacular.
It would disappoint you.
So let's try and, if you can give me flexibility.
What I didn't... I'll come at your pleasure.
Okay.
All right.
Let's try and... I don't want you to make a special trip down.
I will.
Okay.
That's no problem.
This is part of the business.
Right.
You always pick up more.
Okay.
So let's...